<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>Acknowledgements</title>
<link href="WileyTemplate_v5.3.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter"><section epub:type="acknowledgments"><header>
<h1><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="273" id="Page_273"/><a id="fm1"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Acknowledgements</span></h1>
</header>
<section><span id="flast04-sec-0001"/>
<p id="flast04-para-0001"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">This manuscript benefited immensely from the help, guidance, and technical expertise of Bitcoin developer David Harding, who has an admirable gift for communicating complex technical topics effectively. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.2">I thank Nassim Taleb for agreeing to write the foreword to this book, and for helping me in finding a publisher. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.3">At Wiley I have been very fortunate to work with an editor who believed in my book and pushed me to relentlessly improve it, and for that, I am extremely thankful to Bill Falloon, as well as the entire Wiley team for their professionalism and efficiency. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.4">I also thank Rachael Churchill for her thorough and quick proofreading.</span></p>
<p id="flast04-para-0002"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">Earlier drafts of this book were read by a number of friends who gave me excellent feedback to improve it, for which I am very thankful. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.2">In particular, I thank Ahmad Ammous, Stefano Bertolo, Afshin Bigdeli, Andrea Bortolameazzi, Michael Byrne, Napoleon Cole, Adolfo Contreras, Rani Geha, Benjamin Geva, Michael Hartl, Alan Krassowski, Russell Lamberti, Parker Lewis, Alex Millar, Joshua Matettore, Daniel Oliver, Thomas Schellen, Valentin Schmit, Omar Shams, Jimmy Song, Luis Torras, and Hachem Yassine.</span></p>
<p id="flast04-para-0003"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">This book is the result of a learning</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="274" id="Page_274"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1"> process over many years, during which, I have been fortunate to learn from some very bright minds. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.2">In particular, I thank Tuur Demeester, Ryan Dickherber, Pete Dushenski, Michel Fahed, Akin Fernandez, Viktor Geller, Michael Goldstein, Konrad Graf, Pontus Lindblom, Mircea Popescu, Pierre Rochard, Nick Szabo, Kyle Torpey, and Curtis Yarvin for writings and discussions that were instrumental in developing my understanding of Bitcoin.</span></p>
<p id="flast04-para-0004"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">The research and editing for this book benefited from the work of my very able research assistants, Rebecca Daher, Ghida Hajj Diab, Maghy Farah, Sadim Sbeity, and Racha Khayat, to whom I am very thankful. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">Professor George Hall graciously provided me data from his research paper, for which I am grateful.</span></p>
<p id="flast04-para-0005"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1">Finally, neither this book nor Bitcoin would be possible without the tireless work of the volunteer developers who have dedicated their time for the development and maintenance of the protocol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.2">I am grateful for their selflessness and dedication to this project.</span></p>
</section>
</section>
</body>
</html>