<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>Primitive Moneys</title>
<link href="WileyTemplate_v5.3.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<header>
<h1><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="11" id="Page_11"/><a id="c02"/><span class="chapterNumber"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Chapter 2</span></span><br/><span class="chapterTitle"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">Primitive Moneys</span></span></h1>
</header>
<section><span id="c02-sec-0001"/>
<p id="c02-para-0001"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">Of all the historical forms of money I have come across, the one that most resembles the operation of Bitcoin is the ancient system based on Rai stones on Yap Island, today a part of the Federated States of Micronesia. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.2">Understanding how the large circular stones carved from limestone functioned as money will help us explain Bitcoin's operation in </span><a href="c08.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">Chapter 8</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.2">Understanding the remarkable tale of how the Rai stones lost their monetary role is an object lesson in how money loses its monetary status once it loses its hardness.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0002"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">The Rai stones that constituted money were of various sizes, rising to large circular disks with a hole in the middle that weighed up to four metric tons. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">They were not native to Yap, which did not contain any limestone, and all of Yap's stones were brought in from neighboring Palau or Guam. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.3">The beauty and rarity of these stones made them desirable and venerable in Yap, but procuring them was very difficult as it involved a laborious process of quarrying and then shipping them with rafts and canoes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.4">Some of these rocks required hundreds of people to transport them, and once they arrived on Yap, they were placed in a prominent location where everyone could see</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="12" id="Page_12"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1"> them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.2">The owner of the stone could use it as a payment method without it having to move: all that would happen is that the owner would announce to all townsfolk that the stone's ownership has now moved to the recipient. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.3">The whole town would recognize the ownership of the stone and the recipient could then use it to make a payment whenever he so pleased. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.4">There was effectively no way of stealing the stone because its ownership was known by everybody.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0003"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">For centuries, and possibly even millennia, this monetary system worked well for the Yapese. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.2">While the stones never moved, they had salability across space, as one could use them for payment anywhere on the island. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.3">The different sizes of the different stones provided some degree of salability across scales, as did the possibility of paying with fractions of a single stone. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.4">The stones' salability across time was assured for centuries by the difficulty and high cost of acquiring new stones, because they didn't exist in Yap and quarrying and shipping them from Palau was not easy. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.5">The very high cost of procuring new stones to Yap meant that the existing supply of stones was always far larger than whatever new supply could be produced at a given period of time, making it prudent to accept them as a form of payment. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.6">In other words, Rai stones had a very high stock‐to‐flow ratio, and no matter how desirable they were, it was not easy for anyone to inflate the supply of stones by bringing in new rocks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.7">Or, at least, that was the case until 1871, when an Irish‐American captain by the name of David O'Keefe was shipwrecked on the shores of Yap and revived by the locals.</span><sup><a id="fn-1" href="#fn1"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">1</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c02-para-0004"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">O'Keefe saw a profit opportunity in taking coconuts from the island and selling them to producers of coconut oil, but he had no means to entice the locals to work for him, because they were very content with their lives as they were, in their tropical paradise, and had no use for whatever foreign forms of money he could offer them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.2">But O'Keefe wouldn't take no for an answer; he sailed to Hong Kong, procured a large boat and explosives, took them to Palau, where he used the explosives and modern tools to quarry several large Rai stones, and set sail to Yap to present the stones to the locals as payment for coconuts. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.3">Contrary to what O'Keefe expected, the villagers</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="13" id="Page_13"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1"> were not keen on receiving his stones, and the village chief banned his townsfolk from working for the stones, decreeing that O'Keefe's stones were not of value, because they were gathered too easily. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">Only the stones quarried traditionally, with the sweat and blood of the Yapese, were to be accepted in Yap. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.3">Others on the island disagreed, and they did supply O'Keefe with the coconuts he sought. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.4">This resulted in conflict on the island, and in time the demise of Rai stones as money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.5">Today, the stones serve a more ceremonial and cultural role on the island and modern government money is the most commonly used monetary medium.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0005"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1">While O'Keefe's story is highly symbolic, he was but the harbinger of the inevitable demise of Rai stones' monetary role with the encroachment of modern industrial civilization on Yap and its inhabitants. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.2">As modern tools and industrial capabilities reached the region, it was inevitable that the production of the stones would become far less costly than before. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.3">There would be many O'Keefes, local and foreign, able to supply Yap with an ever‐larger flow of new stones. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.4">With modern technology, the stock‐to‐flow ratio for Rai stones decreased drastically: it was possible to produce far more of these stones every year, significantly devaluing the island's existing stock. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.5">It became increasingly unwise for anyone to use these stones as a store of value, and thus they lost their salability across time, and with it, their function as a medium of exchange.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0006"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">The details may differ, but the underlying dynamic of a drop in stock‐to‐flow ratio has been the same for every form of money that has lost its monetary role, up to the collapse of the Venezuelan bolivar taking place as these lines are being written.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0007"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">A similar story happened with the aggry beads used as money for centuries in western Africa. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.2">The history of these beads in western Africa is not entirely clear, with suggestions that they were made from meteorite stones, or passed on from Egyptian and Phoenician traders. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.3">What is known is that they were precious in an area where glassmaking technology was expensive and not very common, giving them a high stock‐to‐flow ratio, making them salable across time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.4">Being small and valuable, these beads were salable across scale, because they could be combined into chains, necklaces, or bracelets; though this was far from ideal, because there were many different kinds of beads rather than one standard unit. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.5">They were also salable across space as they were easy to move around. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.6">In contrast, glass</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="14" id="Page_14"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1"> beads were not expensive and had no monetary role in Europe, because the proliferation of glassmaking technology meant that if they were to be utilized as a monetary unit, their producers could flood the market with them—in other words, they had a low stock‐to‐flow ratio.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0008"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.1">When European explorers and traders visited West Africa in the sixteenth century, they noticed the high value given to these beads and so started importing them in mass quantities from Europe. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.2">What followed was similar to the story of O'Keefe, but given the tiny size of the beads and the much larger size of the population, it was a slower, more covert process with bigger and more tragic consequences. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.3">Slowly but surely, Europeans were able to purchase a lot of the precious resources of Africa for the beads they acquired back home for very little.</span><sup><a id="fn-2" href="#fn2"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.1">2</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.1"> European incursion into Africa slowly turned beads from hard money to easy money, destroying their salability and causing the erosion of the purchasing power of these beads over time in the hands of the Africans who owned them, impoverishing them by transferring their wealth to the Europeans, who could acquire the beads easily. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.2">The aggry beads later came to be known as slave beads for the role they played in fueling the slave trade of Africans to Europeans and North Americans. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.3">A one‐time collapse in the value of a monetary medium is tragic, but at least it is over quickly and its holders can begin trading, saving, and calculating with a new one. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.4">But a slow drain of its monetary value over time will slowly transfer the wealth of its holders to those who can produce the medium at a low cost. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.5">This is a lesson worth remembering when we turn to the discussion of the soundness of government money in the later parts of the book.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0009"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.1">Seashells are another monetary medium that was widely used in many places around the world, from North America to Africa and Asia. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.2">Historical accounts show that the most salable seashells were usually the ones that were scarcer and harder to find, because these would hold value more than the ones that can be found easily.</span><sup><a id="fn-3" href="#fn3"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.1">3</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.1"> Native Americans and early European settlers used wampum shells extensively, for the same reasons as aggry beads: they were</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="15" id="Page_15"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.1"> hard to find, giving them a high stock‐to‐flow ratio, possibly the highest among durable goods available at the time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.2">Seashells also shared with aggry beads the disadvantage of not being uniform units, which meant prices and ratios could not be easily measured and expressed in them uniformly, which creates large obstacles to the growth of the economy and the degree of specialization. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.3">European settlers adopted seashells as legal tender from 1636, but as more and more British gold and silver coins started flowing to North America, these were preferred as a medium of exchange due to their uniformity, allowing for better and more uniform price denomination and giving them higher salability. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.4">Further, as more advanced boats and technologies were employed to harvest seashells from the sea, their supply was very highly inflated, leading to a drop in their value and a loss of salability across time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.5">By 1661, seashells stopped being legal tender and eventually lost all monetary role.</span><sup><a id="fn-4" href="#fn4"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.1">4</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c02-para-0010"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.24.1">This was not just the fate of seashell money in North America; whenever societies employing seashells had access to uniform metal coins, they adopted them and benefited from the switch. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.24.2">Also, the arrival of industrial civilization, with fossil‐fuel‐powered boats, made scouring the sea for seashells easier, increasing the flow of their production and dropping the stock‐to‐flow ratio quickly.</span></p>
<p id="c02-para-0011"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.1">Other ancient forms of money include cattle, cherished for their nutritional value, as they were one of the most prized possessions anyone could own and were also salable across space due to their mobility. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.2">Cattle continue to play a monetary role today, with many societies using them for payments, especially for dowries. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.3">Being bulky and not easily divisible, however, meant cattle were not very useful to solve the problems of divisibility across scales, and so another form of money coexisted along with cattle, and that was salt. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.4">Salt was easy to keep for long durations and could be easily divided and grouped into whatever weight was necessary. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.5">These historical facts are still apparent in the English language, as the word </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.1">pecuniary</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.27.1"> is derived from </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.28.1">pecus</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.1">, the Latin word for cattle, while the word </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.30.1">salary</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.1"> is derived from </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.1">sal</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.33.1">, the Latin word for salt.</span><sup><a id="fn-5" href="#fn5"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.34.1">5</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c02-para-0012"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.1">As technology advanced, particularly</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="16" id="Page_16"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.1"> with metallurgy, humans developed superior forms of money to these artifacts, which began to quickly replace them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.2">These metals proved a better medium of exchange than seashells, stones, beads, cattle, and salt because they could be made into uniform, highly valuable small units that could be moved around far more easily. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.3">Another nail in the coffin of artifact money came with the mass utilization of hydrocarbon fuel energy, which increased our productive capacity significantly, allowing for a quick increase in the new supply (flow) of these artifacts, meaning that the forms of money that relied on difficulty of production to protect their high stock‐to‐flow ratio lost it. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.4">With modern hydrocarbon fuels, Rai stones could be quarried easily, aggry beads could be made for very little cost, and seashells could be collected en masse by large boats. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.5">As soon as these monies lost their hardness, their holders suffered significant wealth expropriation and the entire fabric of their society fell apart as a result. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.6">The Yap Island chiefs who refused O'Keefe's cheap Rai stones understood what most modern economists fail to grasp: a money that is easy to produce is no money at all, and easy money does not make a society richer; on the contrary, it makes it poorer by placing all its hard‐earned wealth for sale in exchange for something easy to produce.</span></p>
</section>
</section>
<section class="noteSet" epub:type="rearnotes">
<h2 id="notes"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.37.1">Notes</span></h2>
<section class="notesList">
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn1" href="#fn-1"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.38.1">1</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.39.1"> The story of O'Keefe inspired the writing of a novel named </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.40.1">His Majesty O'Keefe</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.1"> by Laurence Klingman and Gerald Green in 1952, which was made into a Hollywood blockbuster by the same name starring Burt Lancaster in 1954.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn2" href="#fn-2"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.42.1">2</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.43.1"> To maximize their profits, Europeans used to fill the hulls of their boats with large quantities of these beads, which also served to stabilize the boat on its trip.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn3" href="#fn-3"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.44.1">3</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.45.1"> Nick Szabo, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.46.1">Shelling Out: The Origins of Money</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.47.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.47.2">(2002) Available at </span><a href="http://nakamotoinstitute.org/shelling-out/"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.48.1">http://nakamotoinstitute.org/shelling‐out/</span></a></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn4" href="#fn-4"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.49.1">4</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.50.1"> Ibid.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn5" href="#fn-5"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.51.1">5</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.52.1"> Antal Fekete, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.53.1">Whither Gold?</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.54.1"> (1997). </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.54.2">Winner of the 1996 International Currency Prize, sponsored by Bank Lips.</span></aside></section>
</section>
</body>
</html>