<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>Sound Money and Individual Freedom</title>
<link href="WileyTemplate_v5.3.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter">
<header>
<h1><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="135" id="Page_135"/><a id="c07"/><span class="chapterNumber"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Chapter 7</span></span><br/><span class="chapterTitle"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">Sound Money and Individual Freedom</span></span></h1>
</header>
<section><span id="c07-sec-0001"/>
<blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0002"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">“[G]overnments believe that … when there is a choice between an unpopular tax and a very popular expenditure, there is a way out for them—the way toward inflation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.2">This illustrates the problem of going away from the gold standard.”</span></p>
<p class="right"><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">—Ludwig von Mises</span><sup><a id="fn-1" href="#fn1"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">1</span></a></sup></i></p>
</blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0003"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">Under a sound monetary system, government had to function in a way that is unimaginable to generations reared on the twentieth‐century news cycle: they had to be fiscally responsible. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">Without a central bank capable of increasing the money supply to pay off the government debt, government budgets had to obey the regular rules of financial responsibility which apply to every healthy normal entity, and which monetary nationalism</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="136" id="Page_136"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1"> has attempted to repeal and state education attempted to obfuscate.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0004"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">For those of us alive today, raised on the propaganda of the omnipotent governments of the twentieth century, it is often hard to imagine a world in which individual freedom and responsibility supersede government authority. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.2">Yet such was the state of the world during the periods of greatest human progress and freedom: government was restrained to the scope of protection of national borders, private property, and individual freedoms, while leaving to individuals a very large magnitude of freedom to make their own choices and reap the benefits or bear the costs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.3">We start by critically examining the question of whether the money supply needs to be managed by the government in the first place, before moving to consider the consequences of what happens when it is.</span></p></section>
<section><span id="c07-sec-0002"/>
<h2 id="head-2-23"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">Should Government Manage the Money Supply?</span></h2>
<p id="c07-para-0005"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">The fundamental scam of modernity is the idea that government needs to manage the money supply. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.2">It is an unquestioned starting assumption of all mainstream economic schools of thought and political parties. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.3">There isn't a shred of real‐world evidence to support this contention, and every attempt to manage the money supply has ended with economic disaster. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.4">Money supply management is the problem masquerading as its solution; the triumph of emotional hope over hard‐headed reason; the root of all political free lunches sold to gullible voters. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.5">It functions like a highly addictive and destructive drug, such as crystal meth or sugar: it causes a beautiful high at the beginning, fooling its victims into feeling invincible, but as soon as the effect subsides, the come‐down is devastating and has the victim begging for more. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.6">This is when the hard choice needs to be made: either suffer the withdrawal effects of ceasing the addiction, or take another hit, delay the reckoning by a day, and sustain severe long‐term damage.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0006"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1">For Keynesian and Marxist economists, and other proponents of the state theory of money, money is whatever the state says is money, and therefore it is the prerogative of the state to do with it as it pleases, which is going to inevitably mean printing it to spend on achieving state objectives. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">The aim of economic research, then, is to decide how best to expand the money supply and to what</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="137" id="Page_137"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1"> ends. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.2">But the fact that gold has been used as money for thousands of years, from before nation states were ever invented, is itself enough refutation of this theory. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.3">The fact that central banks still hold large amounts of gold reserves and are still accumulating more of it testifies to gold's enduring monetary nature, in spite of no government mandating it. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.4">But whatever historical quibbles the proponents of the state theory of money may have with these facts, their theory has been obliterated before our very eyes over the last decade by the continued success and growth of Bitcoin, which has achieved monetary status and gained value exceeding that of most state‐backed currencies, purely due to its reliable salability in spite of no authority mandating its use as money.</span><sup><a id="fn-2" href="#fn2"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">2</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0007"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">There are today two main government‐approved mainstream schools of economic thought: Keynesians and Monetarists. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.2">While these two schools have widely disparate methodologies and analytical frameworks, and while they are engaged in bitter academic fights accusing each other of not caring about the poor, the children, the environment, inequality, or the buzzword </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1">du jour</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.1">, they both agree on two unquestionable truths: first, the government has to expand the money supply. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.2">Second, both schools deserve more government funding to continue researching really important Big Questions which will lead them to find ever‐more‐creative ways of arriving at the first truth.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0008"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.1">It's important to understand the different rationales for the two schools of thought in order to understand how they can both arrive at the same conclusion and be equally wrong. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.2">Keynes was a failed investor and statistician who never studied economics but was so well‐connected with the ruling class in Britain that the embarrassing drivel he wrote in his most famous book, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.1">The General Theory of Employment, Money, and Interest</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.1">, was immediately elevated into the status of founding truths of macroeconomics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.2">His theory begins with the (completely unfounded and unwarranted) assumption that the most important metric in determining the state of the economy is the level of aggregate spending across society. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.3">When</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="138" id="Page_138"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.1"> society collectively spends a lot, the spending incentivizes producers to create more products, thus employing more workers and reaching full‐employment equilibrium. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.2">If spending rises too much, beyond the capacity of producers to keep up, it would lead to inflation and a rise in the overall price level. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.3">On the other hand, when society spends too little, producers reduce their production, firing workers and increasing unemployment, resulting in a recession.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0009"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.1">Recessions, for Keynes, are caused by abrupt reductions in the aggregate level of spending. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.2">Keynes was not very good with grasping the concept of causality and logical explanations, so he never quite bothered to explain </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.1">why</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.1"> it is that spending levels might suddenly drop, instead just coining another of his famous clumsy and utterly meaningless figures of speech to save him the hassle of an explanation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.2">He blamed it on the flagging of “animal spirits.” </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.3">To this day, nobody knows exactly what these animal spirits are or why they might suddenly flag, but that of course has only meant that an entire cottage industry of state‐funded economists have made a career out of attempting to explain them or finding real‐world data that can correlate to them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.4">This research has been very good for academic careers, but is of no value to anyone actually trying to understand business cycles. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.5">Put bluntly, pop psychology is no substitute for capital theory.</span><sup><a id="fn-3" href="#fn3"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.24.1">3</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0010"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.1">Freed from the restraint of having to find a cause of the recession, Keynes can then happily recommend the solution he is selling. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.2">Whenever there is a recession, or a rise in the unemployment level, the cause is a drop in the aggregate level of spending and the solution is for the government to stimulate spending, which will in turn increase production and reduce unemployment. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.3">There are three ways of stimulating aggregate spending: increasing the money supply, increasing government spending, or reducing taxes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.4">Reducing taxes is generally frowned upon by Keynesians. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.5">It is viewed as the least effective method, because people will not spend all the taxes they don't have to pay—some of that money will be saved, and Keynes absolutely detested saving. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.6">Saving would reduce spending, and reducing spending would be the worst thing imaginable for an economy seeking</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="139" id="Page_139"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.1"> recovery. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.2">It was government's role to impose high time preference on society by spending more or printing money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.3">Seeing as it is hard to raise taxes during a recession, government spending would effectively translate to increasing the money supply. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.4">This, then, was the Keynesian Holy Grail: whenever the economy was not at full employment, an increase of the money supply would fix the problem. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.5">There is no point worrying about inflation, because as Keynes had “showed” (i.e., baselessly assumed) inflation only happens when spending is too high, and because unemployment is high, that means spending is too low. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.6">There may be consequences in the long run, but there was no point worrying about long‐term consequences, because “in the long run, we are all dead,”</span><sup><a id="fn-4" href="#fn4"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.27.1">4</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.28.1"> as Keynes's most famous defense of high‐time‐preference libertine irresponsibility famously stated.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0011"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.1">The Keynesian view of the economy is, of course, at complete odds with reality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.2">If Keynes's model had any truth to it, it would then necessarily follow that there can be no example of a society experiencing high inflation and high unemployment at the same time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.3">But this has in fact happened many times, most notably in the United States in the 1970s, when, in spite of the assurances of Keynesian economists to the contrary, and in spite of the entire U.S. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.4">establishment, from President Nixon down to “free market economist” Milton Friedman, adopting the refrain, “We're all Keynesians now” as the government took it upon itself to eliminate unemployment with increased inflation, unemployment kept on rising as inflation soared, destroying the theory that there is a trade‐off between these two. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.5">In any sane society, Keynes's ideas should have been removed from the economics textbooks and confined to the realm of academic comedy, but in a society where government controls academia to a very large degree, the textbooks continued to preach the Keynesian mantra that justified ever more money printing. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.6">Having the ability to print money, literally and figuratively, increases</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="140" id="Page_140"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.30.1"> the power of any government, and any government looks for anything that gives it more power.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0012"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.1">The other main school of government‐approved economic thought in our day and age is the Monetarist school, whose intellectual father is Milton Friedman. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.2">Monetarists are best understood as the battered wives of the Keynesians: they are there to provide a weak, watered‐down strawman version of a free market argument to create the illusion of a climate of intellectual debate, and to be constantly and comprehensively rebutted to safely prevent the intellectually curious from thinking of free markets seriously. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.3">The percentage of economists who are actually Monetarists is minuscule compared to Keynesians, but they are given far too much space to express their ideas as if there are two equal sides. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.4">Monetarists largely agree with Keynesians on the basic assumptions of the Keynesian models, but find elaborate and sophisticated mathematical quibbles with some conclusions of the model, which exceptions always lead them to dare to suggest a slightly reduced role for government in the macroeconomy, which immediately gets them dismissed as heartless evil capitalist scum who do not care about the poor.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0013"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.1">Monetarists generally oppose Keynesian efforts to spend money to eliminate unemployment, arguing that in the long run, the effect on unemployment will be eliminated while causing inflation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.2">Instead, Monetarists prefer tax cuts to stimulate the economy, because they argue that the free market will better allocate resources than government spending. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.3">While this debate over tax cuts versus spending increases rages on, the reality is that both policies result in increased government deficits which can only be financed with monetized debt, effectively an increase in the money supply. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.4">However, the central tenet of Monetarist thought is for the pressing need for governments to prevent collapses in the money supply and/or drops in the price level, which they view as the root of all economic problems. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.5">A decline in the price level, or </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.33.1">deflation</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.34.1"> as the Monetarists and Keynesians like to call it, would result in people hoarding their money, reducing their spending, causing increases in unemployment, causing a recession. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.34.2">Most worryingly for Monetarists, deflation is usually accompanied by collapses in the banking sector balance sheets, and because they, too, share an aversion for understanding cause and effect, it thus follows that central banks must do everything possible to ensure that deflation never happens. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.34.3">For the canonical treatment of why Monetarists are so scared of deflation, see a 2002 speech</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="141" id="Page_141"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.1"> by former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke entitled </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.1">Deflation: Making Sure “It” Doesn't Happen Here</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.37.1">.</span><sup><a id="fn-5" href="#fn5"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.38.1">5</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0016"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.39.1">The sum total of the contribution of both these schools of thought is the consensus taught in undergraduate macroeconomics courses across the world: that the central bank should be in the business of expanding the money supply at a controlled pace, to encourage people to spend more and thus keep the unemployment level sufficiently low. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.39.2">Should a central bank contract the money supply, or fail to expand it adequately, then a deflationary spiral can take place, which would discourage people from spending their money and thus harm employment and cause an economic downturn.</span><sup><a id="fn-6" href="#fn6"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.40.1">6</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.1"> Such is the nature of this debate that most mainstream economists and textbooks do not even consider the question of whether the money supply should be increased at all, assuming that its increase is a given and discussing how central banks need to manage this increase and dictate its rates. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.2">The creed of Keynes, which is universally popular today, is the creed of consumption and spending to satisfy immediate wants. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.3">By constantly expanding the money supply, central banks' monetary policy makes saving and investment less attractive and thus it encourages people to save and invest less while consuming more. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.4">The real impact of this is the widespread culture of conspicuous consumption, where people live their lives to buy ever‐larger quantities of crap they do not need. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.5">When the alternative to spending money is witnessing your savings lose value over time, you might as well enjoy spending it before it loses its value. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.6">The financial decisions of people also reflect on all other aspects of their personality, engendering a high time preference in all aspects of life: depreciating currency causes less saving, more borrowing, more short‐termism in economic production and in artistic and cultural endeavors, and perhaps most damagingly, the depletion of the soil of its nutrients, leading to ever‐lower levels of nutrients in food.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0017"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.42.1">In contrast to these two schools of thought stands the classical tradition of economics, which is the culmination of hundreds of years of scholarship from around the world. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.42.2">Commonly</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="142" id="Page_142"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.43.1"> referred to today as the Austrian school, in honor of the last great generation of economists from Austria in its golden age pre‐World War I, this school draws on the work of Classical Scottish, French, Spanish, Arab, and Ancient Greek economists in explicating its understanding of economics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.43.2">Unlike Keynesian and Monetarist fixation on rigorous numerical analysis and mathematical sophistry, the Austrian school is focused on establishing an </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.44.1">understanding</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.45.1"> of phenomena in a causal manner and logically deducing implications from demonstrably true axioms.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0018"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.46.1">The Austrian theory of money posits that money emerges in a market as the most marketable commodity and most salable asset, the one asset whose holders can sell with the most ease, in favorable conditions.</span><sup><a id="fn-7" href="#fn7"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.47.1">7</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.48.1"> An asset that holds its value is preferable to an asset that loses value, and savers who want to choose a medium of exchange will gravitate toward assets that hold value over time as monetary assets. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.48.2">Network effects mean that eventually only one, or a few, assets can emerge as media of exchange. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.48.3">For Mises, the absence of control by government is a necessary condition for the soundness of money, seeing as government will have the temptation to debase its money whenever it begins to accrue wealth as savers invest in it.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0019"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.49.1">By placing a hard cap on the total supply of bitcoins, as discussed in </span><a href="c08.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.50.1">Chapter 8</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.51.1">, Nakamoto was clearly unpersuaded by the arguments of the standard macroeconomics textbook and more influenced by the Austrian school, which argues that the quantity of money itself is irrelevant, that any supply of money is sufficient to run an economy of any size, because the currency units are infinitely divisible, and because it is only the purchasing power of money in terms of real goods and services that matters, and not its numerical quantity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.51.2">As Ludwig von Mises put it:</span><sup><a id="fn-8" href="#fn8"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.52.1">8</span></a></sup></p>
<blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0020"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.53.1">The services money renders are conditioned by the height of its purchasing power. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.53.2">Nobody wants to have in his cash holding a definite number of pieces of money or a definite weight of money; he wants to keep a cash holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.53.3">As the operation of the market tends to determine the final state of money's purchasing power at a height at which the supply of and the demand for money coincide, there can never be an excess</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="143" id="Page_143"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.54.1"> or a deficiency of money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.54.2">Each individual and all individuals together always enjoy fully the advantages which they can derive from indirect exchange and the use of money, no matter whether the total quantity of money is great or small … the services which money renders can be neither improved nor impaired by changing the supply of money…. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.54.3">The quantity of money available in the whole economy is always sufficient to secure for everybody all that money does and can do.</span></p>
</blockquote>
<p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.55.1">Murray Rothbard concurs with Mises:</span><sup><a id="fn-9" href="#fn9"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.56.1">9</span></a></sup></p>
<blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0022"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.57.1">A world of constant money supply would be one similar to that of much of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, marked by the successful flowering of the Industrial Revolution with increased capital investment increasing the supply of goods and with falling prices for those goods as well as falling costs of production.</span></p></blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0023"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.58.1">According to the Austrian view, if the money supply is fixed, then economic growth will cause prices of real goods and services to drop, allowing people to purchase increasing quantities of goods and services with their money in the future. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.58.2">Such a world would indeed discourage immediate consumption as the Keynesians fear, but encourage saving and investment for the future where more consumption can happen. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.58.3">For a school of thought steeped in high time preference, it is understandable that Keynes could not understand that increased savings' impact on consumption in any present moment is more than outweighed by the increases in spending caused by the increased savings of the past. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.58.4">A society which constantly defers consumption will actually end up being a society that consumes more in the long run than a low savings society, since the low‐time‐preference society invests more, thus producing more income for its members. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.58.5">Even with a larger percentage of their income going to savings, the low‐time‐preference societies will end up having higher levels of consumption in the long run as well as a larger capital stock.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0024"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.59.1">If society were a little girl in that marshmallow experiment, Keynesian economics seeks to alter the experiment so that waiting would punish the girl by giving her half a</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="144" id="Page_144"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.60.1"> marshmallow instead of two, making the entire concept of self‐control and low time preference appear counterproductive. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.60.2">Indulging immediate pleasures is the more likely course of action economically, and that will then reflect on culture and society at large. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.60.3">The Austrian school, on the other hand, by preaching sound money, recognizes the reality of the trade‐off that nature provides humans, and that if the child waits, there will be more reward for her, making her happier in the long run, encouraging her to defer her gratification to increase it.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0025"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.61.1">When the value of money appreciates, people are likely to be far more discerning with their consumption and to save far more of their income for the future. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.61.2">The culture of conspicuous consumption, of shopping as therapy, of always needing to replace cheap plastic crap with newer, flashier cheap plastic crap will not have a place in a society with a money which appreciates in value over time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.61.3">Such a world would cause people to develop a lower time preference, as their monetary decisions will orient their actions toward the future, teaching them to value the future more and more. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.61.4">We can thus see how such a society would cause people not only to save and invest more, but also to be morally, artistically, and culturally oriented toward the long‐term future.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0026"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.62.1">A currency that appreciates in value incentivizes saving, as savings gain purchasing power over time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.62.2">Hence, it encourages deferred consumption, resulting in lower time preference. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.62.3">A currency that depreciates in value, on the other hand, leaves citizens constantly searching for returns to beat inflation, returns that must come with a risk, and so leads to an increase in investment in risky projects and an increased risk tolerance among investors, leading to increased losses. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.62.4">Societies with money of stable value generally develop a low time preference, learning to save and think of the future, while societies with high inflation and depreciating economies will develop high time preference as people lose track of the importance of saving and concentrate on immediate enjoyment.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0027"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.63.1">Further, an economy with an appreciating currency would witness investment only in projects that offer a positive real return over the rate of appreciation of money, meaning that only projects expected to increase society's capital stock will tend to get funded. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.63.2">By contrast, an economy with a depreciating currency incentivizes individuals to invest in projects that offer positive returns in terms of the depreciating currency, but negative real returns. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.63.3">The projects that</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="145" id="Page_145"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.64.1"> beat inflation but do not offer positive real returns effectively reduce society's capital stock, but are nonetheless a rational alternative for investors because they reduce their capital slower than the depreciating currency. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.64.2">These investments are what Ludwig von Mises terms </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.65.1">malinvestments</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.66.1">—unprofitable projects and investments that only appear profitable during the period of inflation and artificially low interest rates, and whose unprofitability will be exposed as soon as inflation rates drop and interest rates rise, causing the bust part of the boom‐and‐bust cycle. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.66.2">As Mises puts it, “The boom squanders through malinvestment scarce factors of production and reduces the stock available through overconsumption; its alleged blessings are paid for by impoverishment.”</span><sup><a id="fn-10" href="#fn10"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.67.1">10</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0028"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.68.1">This exposition helps explain why Austrian school economists are more favorable to the use of gold as money while Keynesian mainstream economists support the government's issuance of elastic money that can be expanded at the government's behest. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.68.2">For Keynesians, the fact that the whole world's central banks run on fiat currencies is testament to the superiority of their ideas. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.68.3">For Austrians, on the other hand, the fact that governments have to resort to coercive measures of banning gold as money and enforcing payment in fiat currencies is at once testament to the inferiority of fiat money and its inability to succeed in a free market. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.68.4">It is also the root cause of all business cycles' booms and busts. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.68.5">While the Keynesian economists have no explanation for why recessions happen other than invoking “animal spirits,” Austrian school economists have developed the only coherent theory that explains the cause of business cycles: the Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle.</span><sup><a id="fn-11" href="#fn11"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.69.1">11</span></a></sup></p></section>
<section><span id="c07-sec-0003"/>
<h2 id="head-2-24"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.70.1">Unsound Money and Perpetual War</span></h2>
<p id="c07-para-0029"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.71.1">As discussed in </span><a href="c04.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.72.1">Chapter 4</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.73.1"> on the history of money, it was no coincidence that the era of central bank‐controlled money was inaugurated with the first world war in human history. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.73.2">There are three fundamental reasons that drive the relationship between</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="146" id="Page_146"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.1"> unsound money and war. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.2">First, unsound money is itself a barrier to trade between countries, because it distorts value between the countries and makes trade flows a political issue, creating animosity and enmity between governments and populations. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.3">Second, government having access to a printing press allows it to continue fighting until it completely destroys the value of its currency, and not just until it runs out of money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.4">With sound money, the government's war effort was limited by the taxes it could collect. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.5">With unsound money, it is restrained by how much money it can create before the currency is destroyed, making it able to appropriate wealth far more easily. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.74.6">Third, individuals dealing with sound money develop a lower time preference, allowing them to think more of cooperation rather than conflict, as discussed in </span><a href="c05.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.75.1">Chapter 5</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.76.1">.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0030"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.77.1">The larger the extent of the market with which individuals can trade, the more specialized they can be in their production, and the larger their gains from trade. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.77.2">The same amount of labor expended working in a primitive economy of 10 people would lead to a far lower material living standard than if it had been expended within a larger market of 1,000 or 1,000,000 people. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.77.3">The modern individual living in a free‐trading society is able to work for a few hours a day in a highly specialized job, and with the money she makes she is able to purchase the goods she wants from whichever producers in the entire planet make them with the lowest cost and best quality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.77.4">To fully appreciate the gains from trade that accrue to you, just imagine trying to live your life in self‐sufficiency. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.77.5">Basic survival would become a very hard task for any of us, as our time is spent inefficiently and fruitlessly attempting to provide the very basics of survival to ourselves.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0031"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.78.1">Money is the medium through which trade takes place, and the only tool through which trade can expand beyond the scope of small communities with close personal relationships. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.78.2">For the price mechanism to work, prices need to be denominated in a sound form of money across the community that trades with it. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.78.3">The larger the area using a common currency, the easier and the larger the scope of trade within the area. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.78.4">Trade between peoples creates peaceful coexistence by giving them a vested interest in each other's prosperity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.78.5">When communities use different kinds of unsound money, trade becomes more complicated, as prices vary along with the variation in the value of the currencies, making the terms of trade unpredictable, and making it</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="147" id="Page_147"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.79.1"> often counterproductive to plan economic activity across borders.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0032"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.80.1">Being predisposed to focus on the future, individuals with a low time preference are less likely to engage in conflict than those with a present orientation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.80.2">Conflict is by its very nature destructive, and in most cases, intelligent and future‐oriented people understand that there are no winners in violent conflict, because the winners will likely suffer more losses than if they had just abstained from taking part in the conflict in the first place. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.80.3">Civilized societies function on the premise that people respect one another's wills, and if there are conflicts, they attempt a peaceful resolution. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.80.4">Should an amicable solution not be found, people are more likely to part ways and avoid each other than continue to agitate and remain in conflict. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.80.5">This helps explain why prosperous civilized societies generally do not witness much crime, violence, or conflict.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0033"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.1">On a national level, nations using sound money are far more likely to stay peaceful, or to have limited conflict with one another, because sound money places real constraints on the ability of government to finance its military operations. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.2">In nineteenth‐century Europe, kings who wanted to fight each other had to tax their populations in order to finance their militaries. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.3">In the long run, such a strategy could only be profitable for kings who would employ their military defensively, not offensively. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.4">Defensive military action always has a stronger advantage than offensive military nature, because the defender is fighting on its own soil, near its people and its supply lines. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.5">A monarch who focused the military on defensive action would find his citizens willing to pay taxes to defend themselves from foreign invaders. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.81.6">But a monarch who engaged in protracted foreign adventures to enrich himself would likely face resentment from his population and incur significant costs in fighting other armies on their home soil.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0034"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.82.1">This can help explain why the twentieth century was the deadliest in recorded history. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.82.2">The 2005 United Nations Human Development Report</span><sup><a id="fn-12" href="#fn12"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.83.1">12</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.84.1"> analyzed death from conflicts over the past five centuries, and found the twentieth century to be the deadliest. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.84.2">Even when major European nations went to war with one another in the gold standard era, the wars were usually brief and fought</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="148" id="Page_148"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.1"> in battlefields between professional armies. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.2">A major war of the nineteenth century in Europe was the Franco‐Prussian war of 1870–1871, which lasted for 9 months and killed around 150,000 people, roughly an average week's tally in World War II, financed by the easy government money of the twentieth century. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.3">With the gold standard restricting them to finance war from taxation, European governments had to have their expenses prepared before battle, spend them on preparing their military as effectively as possible, and attempt a decisive victory. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.4">As soon as the tide of the battle began to turn against one of the armies, it was a logistically and economically losing battle to try to increase taxes to rearm the military and turn the tide—better to try to negotiate a peace with as few losses as possible. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.5">The deadliest wars of the nineteenth century were the Napoleonic wars, which were carried out before the gold standard was formally adopted across the continent, after the French revolution's foolish experiments with inflation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.85.6">(See </span><a id="R_c07-tbl-0001" href="#c07-tbl-0001"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.86.1">Table 5</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.87.1">.</span><sup><a id="fn-13" href="#fn13"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.88.1">13</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.89.1">)</span></p>
<figure><figcaption>
<p><span class="figureLabel"><a id="c07-tbl-0001" href="#R_c07-tbl-0001"><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.90.1">Table 5</span></b></a></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.91.1"> Conflict Deaths in the Last Five Centuries</span></p>
</figcaption>
<table border="1">
<thead>
<tr>
<td colspan="4"><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.92.1">Conflicts Steadily Cost More in Human Lives</span></b></td>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.93.1">Period</span></b></td>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.94.1">Conflict‐Related Deaths (millions)</span></b></td>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.95.1">World Population, Midcentury (millions)</span></b></td>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.96.1">Conflict‐Related Deaths as Share of World Population (%)</span></b></td></tr>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.97.1">16th century</span></b></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.98.1">     1.6</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.99.1">  493.3</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.100.1">0.32</span></td></tr>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.101.1">17th century</span></b></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.102.1">     6.1</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.103.1">  579.1</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.104.1">1.05</span></td></tr>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.105.1">18th century</span></b></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.106.1">     7.0</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.107.1">  757.4</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.108.1">0.92</span></td></tr>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.109.1">19th century</span></b></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.110.1">   19.4</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.111.1">1,172.9</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.112.1">1.65</span></td></tr>
<tr>
<td><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.113.1">20th century</span></b></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.114.1">109.7</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.115.1">2,519.5</span></td>
<td><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.116.1">4.35</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</figure>
<p id="c07-para-0035"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.117.1">As it stands, a large number of firms in all advanced economies specialize in warfare as a business, and are thus reliant on perpetuating war to continue being in business. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.117.2">They live off government spending exclusively, and have their entire existence reliant on there being perpetual wars necessitating ever‐larger arms spending. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.117.3">In the United States, whose defense spending is almost</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="149" id="Page_149"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.118.1"> equal to that of the rest of the planet combined, these industries have a vested interest in keeping the U.S. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.118.2">government involved in some form of military adventure or other. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.118.3">This, more than any strategic, cultural, ideological, or security operations, explains why the United States has been involved in so many conflicts in parts of the world that cannot possibly have any bearing on the life of the average American. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.118.4">Only with unsound money can these firms grow to such enormous magnitude that they can influence the press, academia, and think tanks to continuously beat the drums of more war.</span></p></section>
<section><span id="c07-sec-0004"/>
<h2 id="head-2-25"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.119.1">Limited versus Omnipotent Government</span></h2>
<p id="c07-para-0036"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.120.1">In his sweeping history of five centuries of Western civilization, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.121.1">From Dawn to Decadence</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.122.1">, Jacques Barzun identifies the end of World War I as the crucial turning point to begin the decadence, decay, and demise of the West. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.122.2">It was after this war that the West suffered from what Barzun terms “The Great Switch,” the replacement of liberalism by liberality, the impostor claiming its mantle but in reality being its exact opposite.</span><sup><a id="fn-14" href="#fn14"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.123.1">14</span></a></sup></p>
<blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0037"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.124.1">Liberalism triumphed on the principle that the best government is that which governs least; now for all the western nations political wisdom has recast this ideal of liberty into liberality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.124.2">The shift has thrown the vocabulary into disorder.</span></p></blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0038"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.125.1">Whereas liberalism held the role of government as allowing individuals to live in liberty and enjoy the benefits, and suffer the consequences, of their actions, liberality was the radical notion that it was government's role to allow individuals to indulge in all their desires while protecting them from the consequences. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.125.2">Socially, economically, and politically, the role of government was recast as the wish‐granting genie, and the population merely had to vote for what it wanted to have it fulfilled.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0039"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.126.1">French historian Élie Halévy defined </span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="150" id="Page_150"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.127.1">the Era of Tyrannies as having begun in 1914 with World War I, when the major powers of the world shifted toward economic and intellectual nationalization. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.127.2">They nationalized the means of production and shifted to syndicalist and corporatist modes of societal organization, all while suppressing ideas viewed as opposed to the national interest, as well as the promotion of nationalism in what he termed “the organization of enthusiasm.”</span><sup><a id="fn-15" href="#fn15"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.128.1">15</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0040"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.1">This classical liberal conception of government is only possible in a world with sound money, which acted as a natural restraint against government authoritarianism and overreach. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.2">As long as government had to tax its people to finance its operations, it had to restrict its operations to what its subjects deemed tolerable. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.3">Governments had to keep a balanced budget by always keeping consumption within the limits of earnings from taxation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.4">In a society of sound money, government is reliant on the consent of its population to finance its operations. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.5">Every new proposal for government action will have to be paid for upfront in taxes or by the sale of long‐term government bonds, giving the population an accurate measure of the true costs of this strategy, which they could easily compare to the benefits. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.6">A government seeking funding for legitimate national defense and infrastructure projects would have little trouble imposing taxes on, and selling bonds to, the population that saw the benefits before their eyes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.7">But a government which raises taxes to fund a monarch's lavish lifestyle will engender mass resentment among his population, endangering the legitimacy of his rule and making it ever more precarious. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.129.8">The more onerous the taxation and impositions of the government, the more likely the population is to refuse to pay taxes, make tax collection costs rise significantly, or rise up against the government and replace it, whether by ballot or bullet.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0041"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.130.1">Sound money, then, enforced a measure of honesty and transparency on governments, restricting their rule to within what was desirable and tolerable to the population. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.130.2">It allowed for society‐wide honest accounting of costs and benefits of actions, as well as the economic responsibility necessary for any organization, individual, or living being to succeed in life: consumption must come after production.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0042"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.131.1">Unsound money, on the other hand, allows</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="151" id="Page_151"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.132.1"> governments to buy allegiance and popularity by spending on achieving popular objectives without having to present the bill to their people. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.132.2">Government simply increases the money supply to finance any harebrained scheme it concocts, and the true cost of such schemes is only felt by the population in years to come when the inflation of the money supply causes prices to rise, at which point the destruction of the value of the currency can be easily blamed on myriad factors, usually involving some nefarious plots by foreigners, bankers, local ethnic minorities, or previous or future governments. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.132.3">Unsound money is a particularly dangerous tool in the hands of modern democratic governments facing constant reelection pressure. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.132.4">Modern voters are unlikely to favor the candidates who are upfront about the costs and benefits of their schemes; they are far more likely to go with the scoundrels who promise a free lunch and blame the bill on their predecessors or some nefarious conspiracy. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.132.5">Democracy thus becomes a mass delusion of people attempting to override the rules of economics by voting themselves a free lunch and being manipulated into violent tantrums against scapegoats whenever the bill for the free lunch arrives via inflation and economic recessions.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0043"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.133.1">Unsound money is at the heart of the modern delusion believed by most voters and those unfortunate enough to study modern macroeconomics at university level: that government actions have no opportunity costs, and that government can act with an omnipotent magic wand to create the reality it wants. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.133.2">Whether it's poverty reduction, morality enforcement, healthcare, education, infrastructure, reforming other countries' political and economic institutions, or overriding the rules of supply and demand for any emotionally important good, most modern citizens live in the delusional dreamland wherein none of these have actual costs, and all that is needed for these goals to be achieved is “political will,” “strong leadership,” and an absence of corruption. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.133.3">Unsound money has eradicated the notion of trade‐offs and opportunity costs from the mind of individuals thinking of public affairs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.133.4">It will shock the average citizen to have the startlingly obvious pointed out to them: all of these nice things you want cannot be summoned costlessly out of thin air by your favorite politician, or his opponent. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.133.5">They all need to be provided by real people—people who need to wake up in the morning and spend days and years</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="152" id="Page_152"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.134.1"> toiling at giving you what you want, denying themselves the chance to work on other things they might prefer to produce. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.134.2">Though no politician has ever been elected by acknowledging this reality, the ballot box cannot overturn the fundamental scarcity of human time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.134.3">Any time governments decide to provide something it does not increase economic output; it just means more central planning of economic output with predictable consequences.</span><sup><a id="fn-16" href="#fn16"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.135.1">16</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0044"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.136.1">Unsound money was a boon to tyrants, repressive regimes, and illegitimate governments by allowing them to avoid the reality of costs and benefits by increasing the money supply to finance their undertakings first, and letting the population handle the consequences later as they witness their wealth and purchasing power evaporate. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.136.2">History is replete with examples of how governments that have the prerogative to create money out of thin air have almost always abused this privilege by turning it against their own people.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0045"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.1">It is no coincidence that when recounting the most horrific tyrants of history, one finds that every single one of them operated a system of government‐issued money which was constantly inflated to finance government operation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.2">There is a very good reason that Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Mao Ze Dong, Adolf Hitler, Maximilien Robespierre, Pol Pot, Benito Mussolini, Kim Jong Il, and many other notorious criminals all ruled in periods of unsound government‐issued money which they could print at will to finance their genocidal and totalitarian megalomania. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.3">It is the same reason that the same societies which birthed these mass murderers did not produce anyone close to their level of criminality when living under sound monetary systems which required governments to tax before they spent. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.4">None of these monsters ever repealed sound money in order to fund their mass murder. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.5">The destruction of sound money had come before, hailed with wonderful feel‐good stories involving children, education, worker liberation, and national pride. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.137.6">But once sound money was destroyed, it became very easy for these criminals to take over power and take command of all of their society's resources by increasing the supply of unsound money.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0046"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.138.1">Unsound money makes government power</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="153" id="Page_153"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.139.1"> potentially unlimited, with large consequences to every individual, forcing politics to the center stage of their life and redirecting much of society's energy and resources to the zero‐sum game of who gets to rule and how. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.139.2">Sound money, on the other hand, makes the form of government a question with limited consequences. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.139.3">A democracy, republic, or monarchy are all restrained by sound money, allowing most individuals a large degree of freedom in their personal life.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0047"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.140.1">Whether in the Soviet or capitalist economies, the notion of the government “running” or “managing” the economy to achieve economic goals is viewed as good and necessary. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.140.2">It is worth returning here to the views of John Maynard Keynes to understand the motivations of the economic system he proposes, with which humanity has had to contend for the past decades. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.140.3">In one of his lesser‐known papers, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.141.1">The End of Laissez‐Faire</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.142.1">, Keynes offers his conception of what the role of government in a society should be. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.142.2">Keynes expresses his opposition of liberalism and individualism, which one would expect, but also presents the grounds of his opposition to socialism, stating:
</span></p>
<blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0048"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.143.1">Nineteenth‐century State Socialism sprang from Bentham, free competition, etc., and is in some respects a clearer, in some respects a more muddled, version of just the same philosophy as underlies nineteenth‐century individualism. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.143.2">Both equally laid all their stress on freedom, the one negatively to avoid limitations on existing freedom, the other positively to destroy natural or acquired monopolies. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.143.3">They are different reactions to the same intellectual atmosphere.</span></p></blockquote>
<p id="c07-para-0049"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.144.1">Keynes's problem with socialism, then, is that its end goal was increasing individual freedom. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.144.2">For Keynes, the end goal should not be concerned with trivial issues like individual freedom, but for government to control aspects of the economy to his liking. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.144.3">He outlines three main arenas where he views government's role to be vital: first, “the deliberate control of the currency and of credit by a central institution,” the belief that laid the groundwork for modern central banking. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.144.4">Second, and relatedly, Keynes believed it was the role of the government to decide on “the scale on which it is desirable that the community as a whole should save, the scale on which these savings should go abroad in the form of foreign investments, and whether the present organization of the investment</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="154" id="Page_154"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.145.1"> market distributes savings along the most nationally productive channels. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.145.2">I do not think that these matters should be left entirely to the chances of private judgement and private profits, as they are at present.” </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.145.3">And finally, Keynes believed it was the role of the government to devise “a considered national policy about what size of population, whether larger or smaller than at present or the same, is most expedient. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.145.4">And having settled this policy, we must take steps to carry it into operation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.145.5">The time may arrive a little later when the community as a whole must pay attention to the innate quality as well as to the mere numbers of its future members.”</span><sup><a id="fn-17" href="#fn17"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.146.1">17</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0050"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.147.1">In other words, the Keynesian conception of the state, from which came the modern central banking doctrines held widely by all central bankers, and which shape the vast majority of economic textbooks written worldwide, comes from a place of a man who wanted government direction of two important areas of life: first, the control of money, credit, saving, and investment decisions, which meant the totalitarian centralization of capital allocation and destruction of free individual enterprise, making individuals utterly dependent on government for their basic survival, and second, the control of population quantity and quality, which meant eugenics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.147.2">And unlike socialists, Keynes did not seek this level of control over individuals in order to enhance their freedom in the long run, but rather to develop a grander vision of society as he sees fit. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.147.3">While socialists may have had the decency to at least pretend to want to enslave man for his own good, to free him in the future, Keynes wanted government enslavement for its own sake, as the ultimate end. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.147.4">This may help explain why Murray Rothbard said, “There is only one good thing about Marx, at least he was not a Keynesian.”</span><sup><a id="fn-18" href="#fn18"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.148.1">18</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0051"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.149.1">While such a conception might appeal to ivory‐tower idealists who imagine it will only lead to positive outcomes, in reality this leads to the destruction of the market mechanisms necessary for economic production to take place. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.149.2">In such a system, money stops functioning as an information system for production, but rather as a government loyalty program.</span></p></section>
<section><span id="c07-sec-0005"/>
<h2 id="head-2-26"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.150.1">The Bezzle</span></h2>
<p id="c07-para-0052"><a href="c03.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.151.1">Chapter 3</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.152.1"> explained how any commodity</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="155" id="Page_155"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.1"> acquiring a monetary role would incentivize people to produce more of that commodity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.2">A money which can be easily produced will lead to more economic resources and human time being dedicated toward its production. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.3">As money is acquired not for its own properties, but to be exchanged for other goods and services, its purchasing power is important, not its absolute quantity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.4">There is therefore no societal benefit from any activity which increases the supply of money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.5">This is why in a free market, whatever assumes a monetary role will have a reliably high stock‐to‐flow ratio: the new supply of the money is small compared to the overall existing supply. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.6">This ensures that the least possible amount of society's labor and capital resources is dedicated toward producing more monetary media, and is instead dedicated toward the production of useful goods and services whose absolute quantity, unlike that of money, matters. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.153.7">Gold became the leading global monetary standard because its new production was always a reliably tiny percentage of its existing supply, making goldmining a highly uncertain and unprofitable business, thus forcing more and more of the world's capital and labor to be directed toward the production of nonmonetary goods.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0053"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.154.1">For John Maynard Keynes and Milton Friedman, one of the main attractions of moving away from the gold standard was the reduction in the costs of goldmining that would ensue from switching to government‐issued paper money, whose cost of production is far lower than that of gold. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.154.2">They not only misunderstood that gold has very few resources going to its production compared to other goods whose supply can be inflated far more easily, they also severely underestimated the real costs to society from a form of money whose supply can be expanded at the will of a government susceptible to democratic and special‐interest politics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.154.3">The real cost is not in the direct cost of running the printing presses, but from all the economic activity forgone as productive resources chase after the new government‐issued money rather than engage in economic production.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0054"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.155.1">Inflationary credit creation can be understood as a society‐wide example of what economist John Kenneth Galbraith</span><sup><a id="fn-19" href="#fn19"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.156.1">19</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.157.1"> called “the bezzle” in his book on the Great</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="156" id="Page_156"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.158.1"> Depression. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.158.2">As credit expansion in the 1920s soared, corporations were awash with money, and it was very easy for people to embezzle that money in various ways. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.158.3">For as long as the credit keeps flowing, the victims are oblivious, and an illusion of increased wealth is created across society as both the victim and the robber think they have the money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.158.4">Credit creation by central banks causes unsustainable booms by allowing the financing of unprofitable projects and allowing them to continue consuming resources on unproductive activities.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0055"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.159.1">In a sound monetary system, any business that survives does so by offering value to society, by receiving a higher revenue for its products than the costs it incurs for its inputs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.159.2">The business is productive because it transforms inputs of a certain market price into outputs with a higher market price. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.159.3">Any firm that produces outputs valued at less than its inputs would go out of business, its resources freed up to be used by other, more productive firms, in what economist Joseph Schumpeter termed </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.160.1">creative destruction</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.2">There can be no profit in a free market without the real risk of loss, and everyone is forced to have skin in the game: failure is always a real possibility, and can be costly. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.3">Government‐issued unsound money, however, can stall this process, keeping unproductive firms undead but not truly alive, the economic equivalent of zombies or vampires drawing on the resources of the alive and productive firms to produce things of less value than the resources needed to make them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.4">It creates a new societal caste that exists according to rules different from those of everyone else, with no skin in the game. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.5">Facing no market test for their work, they are insulated from consequences to their actions. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.161.6">This new caste exists in every economic sector supported by government money.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0056"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.162.1">It is not possible to estimate with any degree of accuracy what percentage of the economic activity in the modern world economy goes toward pursuing government‐printed money rather than the production of goods and services useful to society, but it is possible to get an idea by looking at which firms and sectors survive because of succeeding in the test of the free market, and which are only alive thanks to government largesse—be it fiscal or monetary.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0057"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.163.1">Fiscal support is the more straightforward of zombie‐creation methods to detect. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.163.2">Any firms that receive direct government support, and the vast majority of firms that are alive thanks</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="157" id="Page_157"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.164.1"> to selling their products to the public sector, are effectively zombies. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.164.2">Had these firms been productive to society, free individuals would have willingly parted with their money to pay for their products. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.164.3">That they cannot survive on voluntary payments shows that these firms are a burden and not a productive asset for society.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0058"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.165.1">But the more pernicious method of creating zombies is not through direct government payments, but through access to low‐interest‐rate credit. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.165.2">As fiat money has slowly eroded society's ability to save, capital investments no longer come from savers' savings, but from government‐created debt, which devalues existing money holdings. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.165.3">In a society with sound money, the more a person saves, the more he is able to accumulate capital and the more he can invest, meaning that capital owners tend to be those with lower time preference. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.165.4">But when capital comes from government credit creation, the allocators of capital are no longer the future‐oriented, but members of various bureaucratic agencies.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0059"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.166.1">In a free market with sound money, capital owners choose to allocate their capital to the investments they find most productive, and can utilize investment banks to manage this allocation process. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.166.2">The process rewards firms that serve customers successfully, and the investors who identify them, while punishing mistakes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.166.3">In a fiat monetary system, however, the central bank is de facto responsible for the entirety of the credit allocation process. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.166.4">It controls and supervises the banks that allocate capital, sets the lending eligibility criteria, and attempts to quantify risks in a mathematical manner that ignores how real‐world risks work.</span><sup><a id="fn-20" href="#fn20"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.167.1">20</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.168.1"> The test of the free market is suspended as central bank direction of credit can overrule the economic reality of profit and loss.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0060"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.169.1">In the world of fiat money, having access to the central bank's monetary spigots is more important than serving customers. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.169.2">Firms that can get low‐interest‐rate credit to operate will have a persistent advantage over competitors that cannot. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.169.3">The criteria for success in the market becomes more and more related to being able to secure funding at lower interest rates than to providing services to society.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0061"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.170.1">This simple phenomenon explains much of modern economic reality, such as the large number of industries that make money but produce nothing of value to</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="158" id="Page_158"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.1"> anyone. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.2">Government agencies are the prime example, and the global notoriety they have earned for their employees' incompetence can only be understood as a function of the bezzle funding that finances them being completely detached from economic reality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.3">Instead of the hard test of market success by serving citizens, government agencies test themselves and invariably conclude the answer to all their failings lies in more funding. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.4">No matter the level of incompetence, negligence, or failure, government agencies and employees rarely ever face real consequences. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.5">Even after the rationale for a government agency's existence has been removed, the agency will continue operating and find itself more duties and responsibility. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.171.6">Lebanon, for instance, continues to have a train authority decades after its trains were decommissioned and the tracks rusted into irrelevance.</span><sup><a id="fn-21" href="#fn21"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.172.1">21</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0062"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.173.1">In a globalized world, the bezzle is not restricted to national governmental organizations, but has grown to include international governmental organizations, a globally renowned drain of time and effort to no conceivable benefit to anyone but those employed in them. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.173.2">Being located away from the taxpayers that fund them, these organizations face even less scrutiny than national governmental organizations, and as such function with even less accountability and a more relaxed approach toward budgets, deadlines, and work.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0063"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.174.1">Academia is another good example, where students pay ever‐more‐exorbitant fees to enter universities only to be taught by professors who spend very little time and effort on the teaching and mentoring of students, focusing most their time on publishing unreadable research to get government grants and climb the corporate academic ladder. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.174.2">In a free market, academics would have to contribute value by teaching or writing things people actually read and benefit from. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.174.3">But the average academic paper is rarely ever read by anyone except the small circle of academics in each discipline who approve each other's grants and enforce the standards of groupthink and politically motivated conclusions masquerading as academic rigor.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0064"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.175.1">The most popular and influential economics textbook in the postwar period was written by Nobel Laureate Paul Samuelson. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.175.2">We saw in </span><a href="c04.xhtml"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.176.1">Chapter 4</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.177.1"> how Samuelson predicted</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="159" id="Page_159"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.178.1"> that ending World War II would cause the biggest recession in world history, only for one of the biggest booms in U.S. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.178.2">history to ensue. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.178.3">But it gets better: Samuelson wrote the most popular economics textbook of the postwar era, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.179.1">Economics: An Introductory Analysis</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.180.1">, which has sold millions of copies over six decades.</span><sup><a id="fn-22" href="#fn22"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.181.1">22</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.182.1"> Levy and Peart</span><sup><a id="fn-23" href="#fn23"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.183.1">23</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.184.1"> studied the different versions of Samuelson's textbook to find him repeatedly presenting the Soviet economic model as being more conducive to economic growth, predicting in the fourth edition in 1961 that the Soviet Union's economy would overtake that of the United States sometime between 1984 and 1997. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.184.2">These forecasts for Soviets overtaking the United States continued to be made with increasing confidence through seven editions of the textbook, until the eleventh edition in 1980, with varying estimates for when the overtaking would occur. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.184.3">In the thirteenth edition, published in 1989, which hit the desks of university students as the Soviet Union was beginning to unravel, Samuelson and his then‐co‐author William Nordhaus wrote, “The Soviet economy is proof that, contrary to what many skeptics had earlier believed, a socialist command economy can function and even thrive.”</span><sup><a id="fn-24" href="#fn24"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.185.1">24</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.186.1"> Nor was this confined to one textbook, as Levy and Peart show that such insights were common in the many editions of what is probably the second most popular economics textbook, McConnell's </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.187.1">Economics: Principles, Policies and Problems</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.188.1">, as well as several other textbooks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.188.2">Any student who learned economics in the postwar period in a university following an American curriculum (the majority of the world's students) learned that the Soviet model is a more efficient way of organizing economic activity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.188.3">Even after the collapse and utter failure of the Soviet Union, the same textbooks continued to be taught in the same universities, with the newer editions removing the grandiose proclamations about Soviet success, without questioning the rest of their economic worldview and methodological tools. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.188.4">How is it that such patently failed textbooks continue to be taught, and how is the Keynesian worldview, so brutally assaulted beyond repair by reality over</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="160" id="Page_160"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.189.1"> the past seven decades—from the boom after World War II, to the stagflation of the seventies, to the collapse of the Soviet Union—still taught in universities? </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.189.2">The dean of today's Keynesian economists, Paul Krugman, has even written of how an alien invasion would be great for the economy as it would force government to spend and mobilize resources.</span><sup><a id="fn-25" href="#fn25"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.190.1">25</span></a></sup></p>
<p id="c07-para-0065"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.191.1">In a free market economic system, no self‐respecting university would want to teach its students things that are so patently wrong and absurd, as it strives to arm its students with the most useful knowledge. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.191.2">But in an academic system completely corrupted by government money, the curriculum is not determined through its accordance with reality, but through its accordance with the political agenda of the governments funding it. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.191.3">And governments, universally, love Keynesian economics today for the same reason they loved it in the 1930s: it offers them the sophistry and justification for acquiring ever more power and money.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0066"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.192.1">This discussion can continue to include many other fields and disciplines in modern academia, where the same pattern repeats: funding coming from government agencies is monopolized by groups of likeminded scholars sharing fundamental biases. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.192.2">You do not get a job or funding in this system by producing important scholarship that is productive and useful to the real world, but by furthering the agenda of the funders. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.192.3">That the funding comes from one source only eliminates the possibility for a free marketplace of ideas. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.192.4">Academic debates concern ever‐more‐arcane minutiae, and all parties in these fraternal disputes can always agree that both parties need more funding to continue these important disagreements. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.192.5">The debates of academia are almost entirely irrelevant to the real world, and its journals' articles are almost never read by anyone except the people who write them for job promotion purposes, but the government bezzle indefinitely rolls on because there is no mechanism by which government funding can ever be reduced when it does not benefit anybody.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0067"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.193.1">In a society with sound money, banking is a very important and productive job, where bankers perform two highly pivotal functions for economic prosperity: the safekeeping of assets as deposits, and the matching of maturity and risk tolerance</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="161" id="Page_161"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.1"> between investors and investment opportunities. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.2">Bankers make their money by taking a cut from the profits if they succeed in their job, but make no profit if they fail. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.3">Only the successful bankers and banks stay in their job, as those that fail are weeded out. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.4">In a society of sound money, there are no liquidity concerns over the failure of a bank, as all banks hold all their deposits on hand, and have investments of matched maturity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.5">In other words, there is no distinction between illiquidity and insolvency, and there is no systemic risk that could make any bank “too big to fail.” </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.194.6">A bank that fails is the problem of its shareholders and lenders, and nobody else.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0068"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.195.1">Unsound money allows the possibility of mismatching maturity, of which fractional reserve banking is but a subset, and this leaves banks always liable to a liquidity crisis, or a bank run. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.195.2">Maturity mismatching, or fractional reserve banking as a special case of it, is always liable to a liquidity crisis if lenders and depositors were to demand their deposits at the same time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.195.3">The only way to make maturity mismatching safe is with the presence of a lender of last resort standing ready to lend to banks in case of a bank run.</span><sup><a id="fn-26" href="#fn26"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.196.1">26</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.1"> In a society with sound money, a central bank would have to tax everyone not involved in the bank in order to bail out the bank. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.2">In a society with unsound money, the central bank is simply able to create new money supply and use it to support the bank's liquidity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.3">Unsound money thus creates a distinction between liquidity and solvency: a bank could be solvent in terms of the net present value of its assets but face a liquidity problem that prevents it from meeting its financial obligations within a certain period of time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.4">But the lack of liquidity itself could trigger a bank run as depositors and lenders seek to get their deposits out of the bank. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.5">Worse, the lack of liquidity in one bank could lead to a lack of liquidity in other banks dealing with this bank, creating systemic risk problems. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.197.6">If the central bank credibly commits to providing liquidity in such cases, however, there will be no fear of a liquidity crisis, which in turn averts the scenario of a bank run and leaves the banking system safe.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0069"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.198.1">Fractional reserve banking, or maturity mismatching more generally, is likely to continue to cause financial crises without a central bank using an elastic money supply to bail out</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="162" id="Page_162"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.199.1"> these banks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.199.2">But the presence of a central bank able to bail out the banks creates a major problem of moral hazard for these banks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.199.3">They can now take excessive risks knowing that the central bank will be inclined to bail them out to avert a systemic crisis. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.199.4">From this we see how banking has evolved into a business that generates returns without risks to bankers and simultaneously creates risks without returns for everyone else.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0070"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.1">Banking is an industry that seemingly only grows these days, and banks cannot go out of business. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.2">Due to the systemic risks involved in running a bank, any failure of a bank can be viewed as a liquidity problem and will very likely get the support of the central bank. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.3">No other ostensibly private industry enjoys such an exorbitant privilege, combining the highest rates of profitability in the private sector with the protection of the public sector. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.4">This combination has made bankers' work as creative and productive as that of public sector employees, but more rewarding than most other jobs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.5">As a result, the financial industry just keeps growing as the U.S. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.6">economy becomes ever more “financialized.” </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.7">Since the repeal of the Glass‐Steagall Act in 1999, the separation between deposit and investment banking has been removed, and so the deposit banks who had FDIC deposit guarantee can now also engage in investment financing, having the FDIC guarantee protect them from investment losses. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.8">An investor who has a loss guarantee has a free option, effectively, a license to print money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.9">Making profitable investments allows them to accrue all the gains, whereas losses can be socialized. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.10">Anybody with such a guarantee can make large amounts of money by simply borrowing and investing his money. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.11">He gets to keep the profits, but will have his losses covered. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.200.12">It is no wonder that this has led to an ever‐larger share of the capital and labor resources gravitating toward finance, as it's the closest thing the world has to a free lunch.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0071"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.201.1">Economist Thomas Philippon</span><sup><a id="fn-27" href="#fn27"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.202.1">27</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.203.1"> has produced detailed studies of the size of the financial sector as a percentage of GDP over the past 150 years. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.203.2">The ratio was less than 3% during the years preceding World War I, but was to shoot up afterwards, collapsing during the Great Depression, but growing seemingly in an unstoppable manner since the end of World War II. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.203.3">Anecdotally, one can see</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="163" id="Page_163"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.204.1"> this reflected in the high percentage of university students who are interested in pursuing careers in finance, rather than in engineering, medicine, or other more productive industries.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0072"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.205.1">As telecommunications have advanced, one would expect that more and more of the financial industry's work can be automated and done mechanistically, leading to the industry shrinking in size over time. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.205.2">But in reality it continues to mushroom, not because of any fundamental demand, but because it is protected from losses by government and allowed to thrive.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0073"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.206.1">The bezzle may be most pronounced in the financial industry, but it does not stop at the banking industry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.206.2">It arguably constitutes a longstanding competitive advantage for firms of larger size over those of a smaller size. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.206.3">In a society in which capital investments are financed from savings, capital is owned by those with a lower time preference, and they allocate it based on their own estimation of the likelihoods of market success, receiving rewards for being correct and losses for being wrong. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.206.4">But with unsound money, savings are destroyed and capital is instead created from inflationary bank credit, and its allocation is decided by the central bank and its member banks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.206.5">Instead of the allocation being decided by the most prudent members of society with the lowest time preference and best market foresight, it is decided by government bureaucrats whose incentive is to lend as much as possible, not be correct, as they are significantly protected from the downside.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0074"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.1">Centrally planning credit allocation is no different from any kind of central planning. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.2">It results in bureaucrats checking boxes and filling in paperwork to ensure they meet their bosses' requirements while the ostensible purpose of the work is lost. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.3">The insight of the banker and the diligence of examining the real value of investments is replaced with the box‐ticking of meeting central bank lending requirements. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.4">A major advantage in securing centralized credit is scale, as it appears quantitatively less risky to lend to large‐scale lenders. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.5">The larger the firm, the more predictable the formula for its success, the larger the collateral in case it fails, and the more secure bank bureaucrats feel when making loans according to central bank lending criteria. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.6">While many industries could benefit from economies of scale, centralized credit issuance accentuates the advantages of size above and beyond what would be the case in a free market. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.207.7">Any industry that can</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="164" id="Page_164"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.208.1"> borrow more money than it knows what to do with is a good candidate, seeing as such a scenario cannot possibly materialize in a world of savings‐financed capital.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0075"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.209.1">The larger the firm, the easier it is for it to secure low‐interest funding, giving it a large advantage over smaller independent producers. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.209.2">In a society where investment is financed from savings, a small mom‐and‐pop diner competes for customers and financing with a fast‐food giant on an equal footing: customers and investors have a free choice in allocating their money between the two industries. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.209.3">The benefits of economies of scale are up against the benefits of the personal attention and relationship between cook and customer of the small diner, and the market test decides. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.209.4">But in a world where central banks allocate credit, the larger firm has an advantage in being able to secure funding at a low rate which its smaller competitors cannot get.</span><sup><a id="fn-28" href="#fn28"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.210.1">28</span></a></sup><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.211.1"> This helps explain why large‐scale food producers proliferate so widely around the world, as their lower interest rates allow them higher margins. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.211.2">The triumph of bland, mass‐produced junk food cannot be understood outside the great benefits that large scale affords to producers.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0076"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.212.1">In a world in which almost all firms are financed through central bank credit expansion, there can be no simple way of discerning which industries are growing because of the injection of bezzle steroids, but there are some telltale symptoms. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.212.2">Any industry in which people complain about their asshole boss is likely part of the bezzle, because bosses can only really afford to be assholes in the economic fake reality of the bezzle. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.212.3">In a productive firm offering valuable service to society, success depends on pleasing customers. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.212.4">Workers are rewarded for how well they do that essential task, and bosses who mistreat their workers will either lose the workers to competitors or destroy their business quickly. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.212.5">In an unproductive firm that does</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="165" id="Page_165"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.1"> not serve society and relies on bureaucratic largesse for its survival, there is no meaningful standard by which to reward or punish workers. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.2">The bezzle can appear seductive from outside, thanks to the generous regular paychecks and the lack of actual work involved, but if there's one lesson economics teaches us, it is that there is no such a thing as a free lunch. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.3">Money being handed out to unproductive people will attract a lot of people who want to do these jobs, driving up the cost of doing these jobs in time and dignity. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.4">Hiring, firing, promotion, and punishment all happen at the discretion of layer upon layer of bureaucrats. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.5">No work is valuable to the firm, everyone is dispensable, and the only way anyone maintains a job is by proving valuable to the layer above him. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.6">A job in these firms is a full‐time game of office politics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.7">Such jobs are only appealing to shallow materialistic people who enjoy having power over others, and years of being maltreated are endured for the paycheck and the hope of being able to inflict this maltreatment on others. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.8">It is no wonder that people who work these jobs are regularly depressed and in need of constant medication and psychotherapy to maintain basic functionality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.9">No amount of bezzle money is worth the spiritual destruction that such an environment creates in people. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.10">While these organizations face no real accountability, the flipside of having no productivity is that it is quite possible for a newly elected official to come into office and completely defund them out of existence in a matter of weeks. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.213.11">This is a far more tragic fate for the workers in these organizations as they generally have no useful skills whatsoever that can be transferred to other avenues of work.</span></p>
<p id="c07-para-0077"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.214.1">The only cure that can work for these pathologies is sound money, which will eradicate the notion of people working for the sake of ticking boxes and pleasing sadistic bosses, and make market discipline the only arbiter for anyone's income. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.214.2">If you find yourself toiling away in one of these industries, where the stress of your job centers purely on pleasing your boss rather than producing something of value, and are not happy with this reality, you may be relieved or frightened to realize the world doesn't have to be this way, and your job may not survive forever, as your government's printing press might not continue working forever. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.214.3">Read on, because the virtues of sound money may inspire a new world of opportunity for you.</span></p>
</section>
</section>
<section class="noteSet" epub:type="rearnotes">
<h2 id="notes"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.215.1">Notes</span></h2>
<section class="notesList">
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn1" href="#fn-1"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.216.1">1</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.217.1"> Bettina Bien Greaves, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.218.1">Ludwig von Mises on Money and Inflation: A Synthesis of Several Lectures</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.219.1">, p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.219.2">32.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn2" href="#fn-2"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.220.1">2</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.221.1"> John Matonis, “Bitcoin Obliterates ‘The State Theory of Money,’” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.222.1">Forbes</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.223.1"> (April 2, 2013). </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.223.2">Available at </span><a href="http://www.forbes.com/sites/jonmatonis/2013/04/03/bitcoin-obliterates-the-state-theory-of-money/#6b93e45f4b6d"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.224.1">http://www.forbes.com/sites/jonmatonis/2013/04/03/bitcoin‐obliterates‐the‐state‐theory‐of‐money/#6b93e45f4b6d</span></a></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn3" href="#fn-3"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.225.1">3</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.226.1"> And in capital theory, accept no substitutes for Austrian Capital Theory, as expounded by Böhm‐Bawerk, Mises, Hayek, Rothbard, Huerta de Soto, Salerno, among others.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn4" href="#fn-4"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.227.1">4</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.228.1"> J. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.228.2">M. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.228.3">Keynes, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.229.1">A Tract on Monetary Reform</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.1"> (1923), Ch. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.2">3, p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.3">80. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.4">It is worth remarking that modern‐day Keynesians reject the interpretation of this quote as signifying Keynes's concern for the present at the expense of the future. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.5">Instead, Keynesians like Simon Taylor argue that this signifies Keynes's prioritizing of tackling unemployment immediately rather than worrying about the remote threat of inflation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.6">This defense unfortunately serves only to expose Keynes's modern disciples to be as short‐termist as he, and exactly as ignorant of the fundamental reality that it is precisely the inflationist policies that cause the unemployment in the first place. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.7">See “The True Meaning of ‘In the Long Run We Are All Dead.’” </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.230.8">Available at </span><a href="http://www.simontaylorsblog.com/2013/05/05/the-true-meaning-of-in-the-long-run-we-are-all-dead"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.231.1">http://www.simontaylorsblog.com/2013/05/05/the‐true‐meaning‐of‐in‐the‐long‐run‐we‐are‐all‐dead/</span></a></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn5" href="#fn-5"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.232.1">5</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.233.1"> “Remarks by Governor Ben S. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.233.2">Bernanke Before the National Economists Club,” Washington, D.C., November 21, 2002, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.234.1">Deflation: Making Sure “It” Doesn't Happen Here</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.235.1">.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn6" href="#fn-6"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.236.1">6</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.237.1"> See Campbell McConnell, Stanley Brue, and Sean Flynn, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.238.1">Economics</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.239.1"> (New York: McGraw‐Hill, 2009), p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.239.2">535.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn7" href="#fn-7"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.240.1">7</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.241.1"> Carl Menger, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.242.1">On the Origins of Money</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.243.1"> (1892).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn8" href="#fn-8"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.244.1">8</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.245.1"> Ludwig von Mises, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.246.1">Human Action</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.247.1"> (1949). </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.247.2">p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.247.3">421.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn9" href="#fn-9"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.248.1">9</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.249.1"> Rothbard, Murray. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.249.2">“The Austrian Theory of Money.” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.250.1">The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.251.1"> (1976): 160 C184.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn10" href="#fn-10"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.252.1">10</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.253.1"> Ludwig von Mises, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.254.1">Human Action</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.255.1"> (1949), p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.255.2">575.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn11" href="#fn-11"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.256.1">11</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.257.1"> See Murray N. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.257.2">Rothbard, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.258.1">Economic Depressions: Their Cause and Cure</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.259.1"> (Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2009).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn12" href="#fn-12"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.260.1">12</span></a> <i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.261.1">Human Development Report 2005</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.262.1"> (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2005).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn13" href="#fn-13"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.263.1">13</span></a> <i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.264.1">Source</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.265.1">: United Nations Development Programme's Human Development Report (2005).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn14" href="#fn-14"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.266.1">14</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.267.1"> Jacques Barzun, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.268.1">From Dawn to Decadence</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.269.1">.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn15" href="#fn-15"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.270.1">15</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.271.1"> Élie Halévy and May Wallas. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.271.2">“The Age of Tyrannies,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.272.1">Economica</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.273.1">, New Series, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.273.2">8, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.273.3">29 (February 1941): 77–93.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn16" href="#fn-16"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.274.1">16</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.275.1"> Murray Rothbard, “The End of Socialism and the Calculation Debate Revisited,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.276.1">The Review of Austrian Economics,</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.277.1"> vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.277.2">5, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.277.3">2 (1991).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn17" href="#fn-17"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.278.1">17</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.279.1"> J. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.279.2">M. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.279.3">Keynes, “The End of Laissez‐Faire,” in </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.280.1">Essays in Persuasion</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.281.1">, pp. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.281.2">272–295.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn18" href="#fn-18"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.282.1">18</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.283.1"> Murray Rothbard, “A Conversation with Murray Rothbard,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.284.1">Austrian Economics Newsletter</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.285.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.285.2">11, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.285.3">2 (Summer 1990).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn19" href="#fn-19"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.286.1">19</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.287.1"> John Kenneth Galbraith, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.288.1">The Great Crash 1929</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.289.1"> (Boston, Ma: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1997), p. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.289.2">133.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn20" href="#fn-20"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.290.1">20</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.291.1"> If for some reason you haven't already, you really should read Nassim Nicholas Taleb's works on this: </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.292.1">Fooled by Randomness</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.293.1">, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.294.1">The Black Swan</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.295.1">, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.296.1">Antifragility</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.297.1">, and </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.298.1">Skin in the Game</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.299.1">.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn21" href="#fn-21"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.300.1">21</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.301.1"> For more on this topic, see James M. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.301.2">Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.302.1">The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.303.1"> (1962).</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn22" href="#fn-22"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.304.1">22</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.305.1"> Mark Skousen, “The Perseverance of Paul Samuelson's Economics,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.306.1">Journal of Economic Perspectives</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.307.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.307.2">11, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.307.3">2 (1997): 137–152.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn23" href="#fn-23"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.308.1">23</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.309.1"> David Levy and Sandra Peart, “Soviet Growth and American Textbooks: An Endogenous Past,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.310.1">Journal of Economic Behavior &amp; Organization</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.311.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.311.2">78, issues 1–2 (April 2011): 110–125.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn24" href="#fn-24"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.312.1">24</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.313.1"> Mark Skousen, “The Perseverance of Paul Samuelson's Economics,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.314.1">Journal of Economic Perspectives</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.315.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.315.2">11, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.315.3">2 (1997): 137–152.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn25" href="#fn-25"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.316.1">25</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.317.1"> Paul Krugman, “Secular Stagnation, Coalmines, Bubbles, and Larry Summers,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.318.1">New York Times</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.319.1">, November 16, 2003.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn26" href="#fn-26"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.320.1">26</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.321.1"> For a formal modeling of this statement, see D. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.321.2">W. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.321.3">Diamond and P. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.321.4">H. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.321.5">Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.322.1">Journal of Political Economy</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.323.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.323.2">91, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.323.3">3 (1983): 401–419.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn27" href="#fn-27"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.324.1">27</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.325.1"> Thomas Philippon and Ariell Reshef. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.325.2">“An International Look at the Growth of Modern Finance,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.326.1">Journal of Economic Perspectives,</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.327.1"> vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.327.2">27, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.327.3">2 (2013): 73–96.</span></aside>
<aside class="noteEntry" epub:type="rearnote"><a id="fn28" href="#fn-28"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.328.1">28</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.329.1"> The centralization of credit issuance can be viewed as a government intervention in the operation of Coase's Law, described by Coase in his essay: “The Nature of the Firm,” </span><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.330.1">Economica</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.1">, vol. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.2">4, no. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.3">16 (1937): 386–405. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.4">According to Coase, the reason firms exist is that the individual contracting of tasks can be more expensive because it involves transaction costs, such as search and information, bargaining, contracting, and enforcement costs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.5">A firm will thus grow for as long as it can benefit from doing activities in‐house to overcome higher external contracting costs. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.6">In a world of depreciating currency and centrally allocated credit, achieving financing becomes one of the main cost advantages of growing in size. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.7">Large firms have more capital goods and collateral, which allows them lower funding terms. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.8">The incentive for every business is thus to grow beyond what consumers would prefer. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.331.9">In a free market for capital where firms had to rely much more on their revenues and securing credit on free markets, the output will favor the scale of production most suited to consumers' preferences.</span></aside></section>
</section>
</body>
</html>