<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>Forewordby Nassim Nicholas Taleb</title>
<link href="WileyTemplate_v5.3.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter"><section epub:type="foreword"><header>
<h1><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="xiii" id="Page_xiii"/><a id="fm5"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Foreword</span></h1>
<p><b><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">by Nassim Nicholas Taleb</span></b></p>
</header>
<section><span id="flast05-sec-0001"/>
<p id="flast05-para-0001"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">Let us follow the logic of things from the beginning. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.2">Or, rather, from the end: modern times. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.3">We are, as I am writing these lines, witnessing a complete riot against some class of experts, in domains that are too difficult for us to understand, such as macroeconomic reality, and in which not only is the expert not an expert, but he doesn't know it. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.4">That previous Federal Reserve bosses Greenspan and Bernanke, had little grasp of empirical reality is something we only discovered too late: one can macroBS longer than microBS, which is why we need to be careful of whom to endow with centralized macro decisions.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0002"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">What makes it worse is that all central banks operated under the same model, making it a perfect monoculture.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0003"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">In complex domains, expertise doesn't concentrate: under organic reality, things work in a distributed way, as F. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.2">A. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.3">Hayek has convincingly demonstrated. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.4">But Hayek used the notion of distributed knowledge. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.5">Well, it looks like we do not even need the “knowledge” part for things to work well. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.6">Nor do we need individual rationality. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.7">All we need is structure.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0004"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">It doesn't mean all participants have</span><span epub:type="pagebreak" title="xiv" id="Page_xiv"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1"> a democratic share in decisions. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.2">One motivated participant can disproportionately move the needle (what I have studied as the asymmetry of the minority rule). </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.3">But every participant has the option to be that player.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0005"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">Somehow, under scale transformation, a miraculous effect emerges: rational markets do not require any individual trader to be rational. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.2">In fact they work well under zero intelligence—a zero‐intelligence crowd, under the right design, works better than a Soviet‐style management composed of maximally intelligent humans.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0006"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">Which is why Bitcoin is an excellent idea. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.2">It fulfills the needs of the complex system, not because it is a cryptocurrency, but precisely because it has no owner, no authority that can decide on its fate. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.3">It is owned by the crowd, its users. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.4">And it now has a track record of several years, enough for it to be an animal in its own right.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0007"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">For other cryptocurrencies to compete, they need to have such a Hayekian property.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0008"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1">Bitcoin is a currency without a government. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">But, one may ask, didn't we have gold, silver, and other metals, another class of currencies without a government? </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.3">Not quite. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.4">When you trade gold, you trade “loco” Hong Kong and end up receiving a claim on a stock there, which you might need to move to New Jersey. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.5">Banks control the custodian game and governments control banks (or, rather, bankers and government officials are, to be polite, tight together). </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.6">So Bitcoin has a huge advantage over gold in transactions: clearance does not require a specific custodian. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.7">No government can control what code you have in your head.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0009"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1">Finally, Bitcoin will go through hiccups. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.2">It may fail; but then it will be easily reinvented as we now know how it works. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.3">In its present state, it may not be convenient for transactions, not good enough to buy your decaffeinated espresso macchiato at your local virtue‐signaling coffee chain. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.4">It may be too volatile to be a currency for now. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.5">But it is the first organic currency.</span></p>
<p id="flast05-para-0010"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">But its mere existence is an insurance policy that will remind governments that the last object the establishment could control, namely, the currency, is no longer their monopoly. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.2">This gives us, the crowd, an insurance policy against an Orwellian future.</span></p>
<p class="right"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">Nassim Nicholas Taleb</span></p>
<p class="right"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1">January 22, 2018</span></p>
</section>
</section></body></html>