<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" epub:prefix="index: http://www.index.com/" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<title>Copyright Page</title>
<link href="WileyTemplate_v5.3.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section class="copyright" epub:type="copyright-page">
<span epub:type="pagebreak" title="iv" id="Page_iv"/>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0004"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Copyright © 2018 by Saifedean Ammous. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.2">All rights reserved.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0005"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0006"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">Published simultaneously in Canada.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0007"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per‐copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750–8400, fax (978) 646–8600, or on the Web at </span><a href="http://www.copyright.com"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">www.copyright.com</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748–6011, fax (201) 748–6008, or online at </span><a href="http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1">www.wiley.com/go/permissions</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0008"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.2">No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.3">The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.4">You should consult with a professional where appropriate. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.5">Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0009"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762–2974, outside the United States at (317) 572–3993, or fax (317) 572–4002.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0010"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1">Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e‐books or in print‐on‐demand. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.3">If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at </span><a href="http://booksupport.wiley.com"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1">http://booksupport.wiley.com</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.2">For more information about Wiley products, visit </span><a href="http://www.wiley.com"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">www.wiley.com</span></a><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1">.</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0011"><i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.1">Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data is Available</span></i><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.1">:</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0012"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.1">ISBN 9781119473862 (Hardcover)</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0013"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.1">ISBN 9781119473893 (ePDF)</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0014"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.1">ISBN 9781119473916 (ePub)</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0016"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.1">Cover Design: Wiley</span></p>
<p class="copyright" id="ffirs01-para-0015"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.1">Cover Images: REI stone © Danita Delimont/Getty Images; gold bars © Grassetto/Getty Images; QR code/Courtesy of Saifedean Ammous</span></p>
</section>
</body>
</html>